## A Simple Theory of Argument Schemes

## G.C. GODDU

Department of Philosophy University of Richmond 401 Ryland Hall Richmond, Virginia USA ggoddu@richmond.edu

Abstract: While  there  has  been  in depth  discussion  of  many  particular argumentation schemes, some lament that there is little to no theory underpinning  the  notion  of  an  argumentation scheme. Here I shall argue against the utility of argument schemes,  at  least  as  a  fundamental part  of  a  complete  theory  of  arguments.  I shall also present and defend a minimalist theory of their nature-a scheme  is  just  a  set  of  proposition expressions  and  propositional  functions. While simple, the theory contravenes several typical desiderata of argumentation schemes such as (i) aiding  in  the  identification  of  enthymemes  and  (ii)  keeping  arguments constrained  to  a  manageable  taxonomy. So much the worse for the desiderata. Instead, I shall recommend focusing less on schemes and more on the component propositional functions.

Résumé: Bien qu'il y ait eu une discussion  approfondie  sur  de  nombreux schèmes d'argumentation particuliers,  certains  déplorent  qu'il  y ait peu ou pas de théorie sous-tendant la  notion  de  schème d'argumentation. Ici,  je  vais  avancer  des  arguments contre l'utilité  des  schèmes  d'argumentation, au moins en tant que partie fondamentale  d'une  théorie  complète des arguments. Je présenterai et défendrai également une théorie minimaliste de leur nature: un schème n'est qu'un ensemble d'expressions de proposition  et  de  fonctions  propositionnelles. Bien que simple, la théorie enfreint  plusieurs  desiderata  typiques des schèmes d'argumentation tels qu'aider à (i) identifier des enthymèmes et (ii) limiter les arguments à  une  taxonomie  gérable.  Tant  pis pour les desiderata. Au lieu de cela, je recommanderai  de  concentrer  moins sur  les  schèmes  et  plus  sur  composants  des  propositions  fonctionnelles.

Keywords: argumentative constant, argumentative force, argument taxonomy, critical questions, propositional functions, schemes

## 1. Introduction

Even though there has been in depth discussion of many particular argumentation  schemes  (see,  for  example,  Macagno  and  Walton 2017;  Walton  2000;  Walton  1999;  Walton  1996),  there  has  also been  a  lament  that  there  is  little  to  no  theory  underpinning  the notion of an argumentation scheme (Dove and Nussbaum 2018). Here  I  shall  present  and  discuss  the  consequences  of  some  very minimalist theories of what argumentation schemes are.

I emphasize that my focus here is on the nature of argumentation  schemes  and  not  a  general  theory  of  schemes,  though,  of course, the nature of schemes will have consequences for a more general theory. Without an adequate theory of the nature or ontology  of  schemes  we  cannot  hope  to  achieve  an  acceptable  and firmly grounded general theory of schemes. Such a general theory might also include a categorization of schemes, a means of distinguishing good schemes from bad ones, an articulation of how to use schemes to aid in other aspects of argumentation theory, etc. Regardless, I shall only briefly touch on a more general, yet still quite simple, theory of argumentation schemes towards the end of the paper.

In section 2, I shall present an underlying assumption of many theorists about schemes and discuss two minimalist theories of the nature of schemes consistent with that assumption. In section 3, I shall  argue  that  these  two  minimalist  theories  do  not  satisfy  the typical desiderata theorists hope to achieve by appealing to argumentation  schemes.  In  section  4,  I  shall  suggest  that  attempts  to modify  the  theories,  or  to  reject  the  underlying  assumption,  to meet the desiderata are unlikely to succeed. Finally, in section 5, I shall hypothesize that instead of taking the results of section 3 and 4  as  a reductio of  the  minimalist  theories  (or  the  underlying  assumption), we should instead focus less on schemes and more on the component parts.

## 2. What are argument schemes?

According to Douglas Walton, Chris Reed, and Fabrizio Macagno, in their book, Argumentation Schemes :

Argumentation schemes are forms of argument (structures of inference) that represent structures of common types of arguments used  in  everyday  discourse,  as  well  as  in  special  contexts  like those of legal argumentation and scientific argumentation (2008, p, 1). 1

Though I  am  not  sure  what  it  means  for  a  form  of  argument  to represent a structure of a common type of argument, we can start with the notion that argument schemes are at the very least forms of argument. Indeed, their very next sentence is: 'They include the deductive and inductive forms of argument that we are already so familiar with in logic …' (Walton, Reed, and Macagno, 2008, p. 1; see also, p. 12). Though perhaps not wholly explicit, Christoph Lumer (2011), David Hitchcock, (2017), and Manfred Kienpointner,  (2018),  all,  at  least  by  the  examples  they  give,  endorse  this last  claim.  Hence,  whatever  argument  schemes  are,  it  is  as  least true that:

## (1) Logical forms are a type of argument scheme.

Here, then, is a simple way to get a theory that accepts (1). Suppose  an  argument  is  a  set  of  a  set  of  propositions  and  another proposition.  Argument  schemes  are  the  forms  of  arguments  or schematic  arguments.  Propositional  functions  are  the  forms  of propositions or schematic propositions. Hence, the simplest theory of the nature of argument schemes would be:

T1:  An  argument  scheme  is  a  set  of  a  set  of  propositional functions and another propositional function.

## 2.1. Propositional functions

What exactly is a propositional function? According to Russell and Whitehead:

By a 'propositional function' we mean something which contains a variable x , and expresses a proposition as soon as a value is assigned to x . That is to say, it differs  from  a  proposition  solely  by

1  See also Macagno (2015), Macagno (2018), and Wyner (2016).

the  fact  that  it  is  ambiguous:  it  contains  a  variable  of  which  the value is unassigned. (Russell &amp; Whitehead 1925, p. 38).

Assuming  there  is  a  difference  between  the  things  that  express propositions (presumably some sort of sentence in some language) and propositions themselves, then it is hard to make both sentences of  what  Russell  and  Whitehead  say  compatible,  since  the  first makes them the sort of thing that express propositions, while the second makes them a kind of ambiguous proposition. Their gloss on ambiguity in terms of a variable with an unassigned value does not help. A variable is itself an expression and so the propositions themselves would not contain variables. The question is what does the variable express or represent? Presumably, some sort of hole or gap or incompleteness in a partial proposition.

I suspect one could go either way with a theory of propositional functions  and  so  the  ontology  of  argument  schemes-schemes could  be  (i)  sets  of  expressions  with  at  least  one  variable  or  (ii) sets of incomplete propositions. In favor of propositions one might argue, firstly, that if one thinks it is possible for different expressions to express the same scheme, then since the expressions are different and the scheme the same, the scheme had better not be composed of expressions. For example, if one thinks that 'Anyone who respects Bob ought to respect George; x respects Bob; hence x ought  to  respect  George'  is  just  another  way  of  expressing  the same scheme as 'If x respects Bob, then x ought to respect George; x respects Bob; so x ought to respect George' then one will have to opt for propositional functions as incomplete propositions or propositions  with  'holes.'  We  express  these  incomplete  propositions via  sentences  with  variables  in  them  to  represent  the  'holes'  and yet  it  appears  that  different  such  expressions  can  represent  the same incomplete proposition. Secondly, if one takes seriously that argument  schemes  are  arguments  with  'holes'  in  them,  and  that arguments are composed of propositions, as many are inclined to do, then the 'holes' will be in the constituent propositions, and so propositional functions will be propositions with 'holes' in them.

Unfortunately, given (1), the second argument leads to incoherence.  If  we  take  seriously  the  claim  that  argument  schemes  are

schemes  with  'holes,'  and  take  seriously  the  claim  that  logical forms, such as:

## S1: If X , then Y ; X ; hence, Y

are  schemes,  then  the  'holes'  may  not  merely  be  'holes' in the constituent propositions, but 'holes' that encompass entire propositions.  For  example,  the  ' X '  in  S1  is  not  a  proposition  with  a 'hole' in it, or an incomplete proposition, but at best a 'hole' that can be filled by entire propositions. We may be able to make the holes in a piece of swiss cheese bigger and bigger, but a hole that excludes all the cheese is not an instance of swiss cheese or even an incomplete piece of swiss cheese. The notion of an incomplete proposition  that  is just a  'hole'  is  incoherent, 2 and  yet  logical forms require 'holes' that range over entire propositions. Hence, I opt here for propositional functions to be expressions with at least one variable, which could be just the variable itself. 3

But what of the intuition that we can use different expressions to  represent  the  same  argument  scheme  as  in  the  first  argument above or that we could use different expressions to represent the same incomplete proposition as in the English, ' x hates y ' and the German, ' x hasst y '. Since they are in different languages, they are different  expressions  and  yet  they  apparently  express  the  same incomplete proposition.

Suppose we have a set of allowable substitutions for ' x ' and ' y ' in  English  and  a  set  of  allowable  substitutions  for  ' x '  and  ' y '  in German. Then, just as long as the set of propositions that are expressed  from  all  the  possible  substitutions  for  ' x '  and  ' y '  in  ' x hates y ' in English is the same set of propositions as from ' x hasst y ' in German, then the two expressions pick out the same proposi-

2 Some would argue that the notion of a proposition with parts, and so with one part missing, is incoherent (See, for example, Keller, 2013). But regardless of the metaphysics of propositions, the entirety of the proposition missing is not an incomplete proposition, so I need not take a stand on the metaphysics of propositions here.

3 In  an  earlier  presentation  version  of  this  work  (Goddu,  2019)  I,  for  ease  of presentation, just stipulated that propositional functions were a sort of incomplete proposition. Subsequent reflection has led me to opt for expressions.

tional function. 4  In other words, propositional functions are equivalence classes of expressions.

We  arrive  then  at  the  following  definition  of  a  propositional function:

D1: By a 'propositional function' we mean a class of expressions, each of which is either a variable or contains at least one variable,  such  that  when  each  variable  in  each  expression is replaced with an equivalent value, every member of the class expresses the same proposition.

As ungainly as this definition might at first appear, assuming that one (a) wants to take (1) seriously and (b) allow for the possibility of  different  expressions  with  variables  ultimately  picking  out  the same function, our options are limited. 5

But  if  arguments  are  composed  of  propositions  and  argument schemes  are  composed  of  expressions,  we  lose  the  intuitive  elegance of being able to say that argument schemes are schematic arguments because they are composed of schematic propositions. Perhaps the inelegance can be avoided by holding that arguments are themselves composed of expressions rather than propositions.

Of the three ontological candidates for arguments, viz, propositions, acts, or expressions, expressions is probably the least popular choice amongst theorists. One primary reason is that Anselm's Ontological  argument  in  Latin,  is  still  Anselm's  Ontological  Argument  when  translated  into  English  or  German.  But  since  the

4 I leave unanswered the question of whether the set of allowable substitutions for the variables in a propositional function is part of the function, in which case different substitution sets would entail different functions (and so the number of argument  schemes  would  multiply  accordingly)  or  whether  one  propositional function can be used with different domains for the variables.

5 But not necessarily to just expressions. For example, one could take propositions  to  be  sets  of  possible  worlds  and  then  take  a  propositional  function  to literally  be  a  function  such  as f ( x is  tall)  that  maps  allowable  substitution instances  of x to  sets  of  possible  worlds.  Of  course,  we  would  still  need  to determine the nature of the allowable substitution instances for x -would those be expressions or the referent of those expressions? Also, we would still lose the notion  that  propositional  functions  were  incomplete  propositions  since  the notion of an incomplete set of possible worlds is incoherent.

languages  are  different,  the  expressions  are  different  and  so  if arguments are composed of expressions, we would have to say the Latin, English, and German versions of Anselm's argument are all different arguments.

But why not make the same move made above to explain how different expressions pick out the same propositional function, i.e., are in one particular equivalence class of expressions? Arguments, then,  would  be  equivalence  classes  of  expressions,  i.e.,  all  the expressions  that  express  the  same  complex  of  propositions  and Anselm's argument in Latin, or English, or German, would once again be one argument. There is however a significant difference between the case of arguments and the case of propositional functions.  In  the  case  of  propositional  functions,  the  choices  were incomplete  propositions  or  expressions.  I  chose  expressions  and then defined equivalence classes of expressions in terms of sets of propositions.  Complete  propositions  were  not  one  of  the  options for propositional functions. But in the case of arguments, propositions are one of the options for the components of arguments, so if one is ultimately relying on the propositions to define the equivalence  class  of  expressions  that  are  an  argument,  one  should  just say the propositions are the argument-after all, the propositions are doing all the work. Hence, despite the inelegance of arguments being composed of propositions and argument schemes (or schematic arguments) being composed of expressions, I still avoid the incoherence  of  incomplete  propositions  that  are  just  'holes'  and account  for  the  intuition  that  different  expressions  could  express the same propositional function.

The incoherence of incomplete propositions that are just holes is a result of accommodating (1), that logical forms are schemes. But perhaps if we give up (1) we can avoid the incoherence. Perhaps. But the point of this paper is to try to articulate a theory of the  nature  of  argument  schemes  that  respects  (1)  and  point  out some  of  its  consequences.  Some  of  those  consequences  may  be unpalatable enough for some to reject the resulting theory-I do not. Regardless, for now, I hold off evaluating the consequences of holding or rejecting (1), see especially section 4.2, until after the theory  has  been  fully  presented.  I  turn  instead  to  a  difficulty  for T1.

## 2.2. A difficulty for T1

Suppose one takes seriously the claim that argument schemes are schematic arguments. 6  Hence, every argument can be made into a scheme by schematizing at least one element of the expression of the argument, i.e., by replacing at least one element of the expression  with  a  variable.  So,  consider  the  slightly  stilted  argument expression:

A1: Harry hates Billy. Hence, not possible that Harry impartially evaluates Billy's work.

Now  consider  some  potential  single  variable  schematizations  of A1:

- S2: X hates  Billy.  Hence,  not  possible  that X impartially evaluates Billy's work.
- S3: Harry hates X . Hence, not possible that Harry impartially evaluates X 's work.
- S4: Harry Xs Billy. Hence, Harry cannot impartially evaluate Billy's work.
- S5: X .  Hence,  not  possible  that  Harry  impartially  evaluates Billy's work.
- S6: Harry hates Billy. Hence, X possible  that  Harry  impartially evaluates Billy's  work.
- S7:  Harry  hates  Billy.  Hence,  not X that  Harry  impartially evaluates Billy's work.
- S8: Harry hates Billy. Hence, not possible that Harry X evaluates Billy's work.
- S9: Harry hates Billy. Hence, not possible that Harry impartially Xs Billy's work.
- S10: Harry hates Billy. Hence, not possible that Harry impartially evaluates Billy's X .
- S11: Harry hates Billy. Hence, not possible that X

6 This sort of claim motivates what David Hitchcock calls bottom-up generation of schemes (Hitchcock, 2017, p. 226).

S12: Harry hates Billy. Hence, not X .

S13: Harry hates Billy. Hence, X .

Depending  on  what  can  and  cannot  be  properly  replaced  with  a variable, a question I am not going to try to answer here, there may be even more single variable schematizations of A1, such as:

S14:  Harry X evaluates Billy's work,

S15: Harry hates Billy. Hence, not possible that Harry X Billy's work,

S16: Harry hates Billy. Hence, not possible that Harry X

.  Hence,  not  possible  that  Harry  impartially .

The maximal schematization is the eight variable:

S17: X Ys Z . Hence, A B ( X C Ds Z 's E ).

There  are  lots  of  schematizations  in  between,  such  as  the  two variable:

S18: X . Hence, Y

or

S19: Harry hates Billy. Hence, not X that Harry impartially Ys Billy's work, or the three variable:

S20: X Zs Y . Hence, not possible that X impartially evaluates Y 's work.

All of these are schematic instances of Argument 1. But given T1, not all of them are argument schemes, since T1 requires that every sentence element of a target argument expression be turned into  a  propositional  function.  But  this  is  true  of  only  two  of  the fifteen given potential single variable schematizations, since only

two  elements  are  common  to  both  premise  and  conclusion,  viz 'Harry' and 'Billy.'

If all it takes to be an argumentation scheme is to be the schematization of some argument expression, then S4-S13 are schemes just  as  much  as  S2  and  S3.  Indeed,  I  suspect  it  is  an  interesting question what can and cannot be substituted in for X in  Harry Xs Billy in S4, such that it is true that it is not possible for Harry to impartially evaluate Billy's work. Of course, one might argue that Harry and Billy are just placeholders here and the real scheme of interest is S20, which does satisfy T1. But consider:

S21: Mephistopheles X s God. Hence, not possible for Mephistopheles to impartially consider God's judgments.

In this case, given how unique Mephistopheles and God are supposed to be, we may really be interested in what values of X would make the conclusion true for those two individuals. In other words, I am not sure we should rule out by definition that schemes cannot have complete proposition expressions as parts.

In  addition,  I  also  suspect  that  our  maximal  schematization, S17, is unlikely to be of much interest, since it will have too many disparate and unrelated instances to make it of any value, and yet it also  satisfies  T1.  So,  T1  as  it  stands  appears  to  exclude  certain items  by  definitional  fiat  and  merely  appealing  to  some  sort  of 'suitably  general'  principle  will  not  explain  why  the  maximal schematization  is  of  limited  to  no  interest.  Hence,  to  avoid  the definitional exclusion of many of the possible schematizations of A1, I also offer the following even more liberal definition of argumentation schemes:

- T2: An argument scheme is a set of a set of proposition expressions or propositional functions and another proposition expression  or  propositional  function,  with  at  least  one  element being a propositional function.

Regardless of whether one adopts T2 (or accepts T1 and the concurrent  challenge  of  explaining  why  S4-S13  and  perhaps  S21 should  be  excluded  from  the  realm  of  schemes),  either  theory

captures all existing cases of argumentation schemes. Any logical form such as:

S22: X or Y ; not X ; hence, Y .

or

S23: If X , then Y ; If Y , then Z ; Hence, if X , then Z , can be captured by T1, and anything that satisfies T1 also satisfies T2. Similarly, typical argumentation schemes such as:

- S24: Source E is  an  expert  in  subject  domain S containing proposition A ; E asserts that  proposition A is true (false); Hence, A is true (false.), (Walton, Reed, and Macagno, 2008, p. 310)

or

S25:  Generally,  case  C1  is  similar  to  Case  C2; A is  true (false) in case C1; Hence, A is true (false) in case C2. (Walton, Reed, and Macagno, 2008, p. 315)

satisfy both T1 and T2. In fact, all the schemes one can find in the literature  satisfy  both  T1  and  T2. 7 Of  course,  recall  we  have  the scheme:

## S18: X , Hence Y ,

which captures all possible simple arguments given that X could be any proposition whatsoever (including a perhaps infinite conjunction) and Y could be any proposition whatsoever.

7 What if there are arguments with multiple conclusions? Then T1 and T2 are just definitions of simple argument schemes and then sets of schemes would be needed to capture complex schemes.

## 2.3. Critical questions?

One might object that  T1  and  T2  do  not  capture  all  given  argumentation  schemes  on  the  grounds  that  in  many  cases,  schemes, especially defeasible schemes, are presented along with a series of critical  questions  and  T1  and  T2  include  no  mention  of  critical questions at all. Are critical questions part of schemes or not?

One  standard  answer  is  'no.'  Schemes  have  corresponding questions,  but  the  questions  are  not  part  of  the  schemes  themselves,  but  rather  provide  guidance  for  the  proper  evaluation  of instances of the schemes. For example, Walton, Reed, and Macagno  write:  'The  two  elements  together,  the  argumentation scheme and the matching critical questions, are used to evaluate a given  argument  in  a  particular  case  …'  (2008,  p.  11).  David Hitchcock writes:

As an aid to evaluation of the inference in an argument fitting a certain scheme, the theorist will provide a list of so-called 'critical questions'  to  be  asked  corresponding  to  the  conditions  under which arguments of the scheme in question have a good inference (2017, p. 226).

Ian Dove and E. Michael Nussbaum (2018), citing the challenges of getting students to even recognize and utilize schemes, propose a  strategy  for  argument  assessment  that  generalizes  the  critical questions  so  as  to  be  completely  independent  of  any  particular argument scheme.

Indeed, examination of the critical questions should lead one to believe that they are not constitutive of the scheme since the critical  questions  are  not  setting  out  conditions  for  an  instance  of  a particular scheme being an  instance of the scheme. For example, consider  the  question,  'Are  there  other  events  that  would  more reliably  account  for  the  sign?',  in  a  typical  argument  from  sign. The answer is either 'yes' or 'no.' But neither answer entails that the target argument is or is not an instance of an argument from sign.  Rather  those  answers  help  an  evaluator  of  a  particular  instance of an argument from sign judge whether the argument is a good  one  or  not.  In  other  words,  the  critical  questions  are  not setting conditions for something to be an instance of the scheme in

question, but rather setting conditions for something to be a good or acceptable instance  of  the  scheme.  We  should  keep  identity conditions  separate  from  goodness  conditions,  and  so  critical questions should not play a role in defining the scheme.

But  despite  the  quotation  given  above,  Walton,  Reed,  and Macagno also write: 'The critical questions form a vital part of the definition of a scheme…' and 'the complete set of linked premises employed in a scheme is thus the union of those given as premises and (the propositional content of) those listed as critical questions'  (2008,  p.  17).  They  provide  an  example  in  which  critical question content gets added as explicit premises with the scheme 'appeal  to  expert  opinion'  in  order  to  generate  more  and  more refined and complex versions of the scheme.

Suppose we have some scheme S with associated critical questions, CQs. There is no doubt that we can incorporate the content of the CQs into S to create a new scheme S'. For example, suppose S is ' X and X is a sign of Y , so Y ' with CQs, 'What is the strength of the correlation of the sign with the event signified?' and 'Are there other events that would more reliably account for the sign?' Hence, S' might  be  ' X and X is  a  sign  of Y and  no  other  events more reliably account for X and the correlations of X with Y in the context is sufficient, so Y .'

Does S' have its own associated critical questions or not? If not, then there are schemes with no associated critical questions and so critical  questions  are  not  necessary  for  the  identity  of  schemes. Indeed, in such a case, S' satisfies both T1 and T2 as does S without  the  corresponding  CQs.  But  the  objection  to  T1  and  T2  on offer  was  that  it  was  failing  to  account  for  the  CQs,  so  the  only way for the objection to continue is to claim that S really is not a scheme after all, and only S' is, even though it has no CQs either and that seems arbitrary at best. We already know that we can take an argument ' X , so Y ' and transform it into the argument ' X , if X , then Y ,  so Y' such that both arguments work or fall together. All that  changes  is  the  evaluation-if  the  inference  of  the  original argument fails,  then  the  conditional  premise  of  the  second  argument is false and vice-versa. If the inference from X to Y is good, then the conditional premise of the second argument is true, and we are right back to determining whether or not X is in fact true or

acceptable or whatever the premise adequacy standard is that is in play.  But  incorporating  the  CQs  of  S  to  generate  S'  is  the  exact same sort  of  transformation-if  we  compare  instances  of  S  with S', what used to be questions about the premise adequacy or inference adequacy of S will now be questions about premise adequacy of S' for the newly added premises. For example, is it true that the correlation between X and Y is sufficient in the context or not? But just as no one denies that both ' X , so Y' and ' X , if X , then Y , so Y ' are  both  arguments,  no  one  should  deny  that  both  S  and  S'  are both schemes.

But suppose S' does have its own critical questions. Then the associated critical questions for S' can be incorporated as missing premises to create scheme S'' and we have our two options again for S''. If it does not have CQs, then S'' will satisfy T1 and T2 just as well as S and S' stripped of their CQs and saying S'' is the real scheme  whereas  S  and  S'  are  not  will  again  be  arbitrary.  If  S'' does  have  CQs,  then  once  again  we  can  raise  the  dilemma  by creating S'''. Perhaps one might argue that eventually we will hit generic  critical  questions  such  as-are  the  premises  adequate  in the context, is the argument question begging in the context, do the premises  sufficiently  support  (either  by  themselves  or  despite proximate  potential  counterexamples)  the  conclusion  in  the  context? But since these questions can be asked of any argument, they are not doing any scheme individuating work-but that means the scheme is being individuated solely by its content independently of  the  generic  critical  questions,  i.e.,  we  are  in  the  exact  same situation  we  were  in  when  we  supposed  we  could  have  schemes without critical  questions,  i.e.,  we  have  a  theory  of  schemes  that satisfies  T1  and  T2.  Hence,  either  we  can  have  schemes  without critical questions (which satisfy T1 and T2) or attempts to incorporate critical questions into schemes while also appealing to critical questions as part of the identity  conditions  of  schemes  generates an infinite regress.

## 3. The proposed desiderata of schemes

Both T1 and T2 are quite simple theories of the nature of argument schemes.  I  also  suspect  many  theorists  will  not  find  them  very

satisfying since the resulting schemes will fulfill few if any of the roles traditionally asked of schemes. For example, Macagno writes of schemes that:

they allow classifying arguments in general categories. They bring to light the implicit rule of inference from the explicit premise(s) to the conclusion in an enthymeme, …they guide the evaluation of arguments through the set of critical questions. On the other hand, they can be used for producing arguments. Considering the type of conclusion and the available evidence, the user can select the most appropriate  scheme  and  make  explicit  the  premises  providing more support to his claim. (Macagno, 2018, p. 560.)

Hitchcock, citing Garssen (2001, p. 81), also mentions inventing  and  evaluating  arguments,  but  also  adds  'describing  how  a certain group of people reason and argue' (2017, p. 229). So the proposed roles are (1) providing an argument taxonomy, (2) argument  evaluation,  (3)  enthymeme  reconstruction,  (4)  argument invention, and (5) describing sub-groups' reasoning patterns. I will go through each of these in turn.

## 3.1. Argument taxonomy

If schemes are types of arguments, then arguments that instantiate a particular scheme would be arguments of that type. Then, if we had  a  practically  manageable  table  of  argument  types,  we  might end up with a useful taxonomy of arguments. Just as it is useful to be able to classify substances via the periodic table or living things via  Linnaean  taxonomy,  so  as  to  make  predictions  about  how substances or living things will behave given their varying properties  in  varying  circumstances,  presumably  it  is  useful  to  know what  type  of  argument  is  being  instantiated  in  a  given  circumstance.  Godden  and  Walton,  for  example,  write:  'from  a  purely theoretical point of view, we agree with Garssen (1994, pp. 106107) that a minimal set of exhaustive, mutually exclusive schemes is desirable' (2007, p. 270). In addition, the hope expressed at the panel  session  on  argument  taxonomy  at  the  second  European Conference  on  Argumentation  was  that  we  get  a  complete  but manageable  set  of  schemes  (see  Hoppman  2018,  Kienpointner

2018, Macagno 2018, Wagemans 2018; but also Macagno, 2015, p. 184 and Hitchcock 2017, p. 236).

T1 and T2 may be complete, but the resulting list of schemes is not manageable. Firstly, there are an infinite number of schemes (since there are an infinite number of logical forms and an infinite number of propositional functions). But an infinity of taxonomical categories is generally not practically manageable. 8  More significantly, the schemes accommodated by T1 or T2 are not themselves ordered  in  the  way  that,  say,  elements  on  the  periodic  table  are ordered. So while, in principle at least, we could have an infinite number of elements ordered in terms of numbers of protons and neutrons in the atom, T1 and T2, by themselves do not imply any ordering of the resulting infinity of schemes. Additionally, though an  infinity  of  elements  is  theoretically  possible,  what  makes  the periodic table useful is that the actually existing elements are finite and then grouped into eighteen groupings that share relevant properties and which then allows the desired predictions about behaviors  in  given  circumstances. T1 and T2 both quickly generate an infinite  number  of  actual  arguments  schemes  and  simultaneously provide no ordering or subgroupings of those schemes. Hence, the taxonomy generated by T1 and T2 will not be very helpful.

In  addition,  T1  and  T2  may  be  exhaustive,  but  the  resulting schemes  are  not  exclusive,  at  least  in  the  sense  that  any  given argument is an instance of exactly one scheme. Arguments instantiate lots of different schemes. Just consider A1 and the very partial set of schemes I provided above. So, what type of argument is A1 exactly according to schemes? Note also that A1, along with all single conclusion arguments instantiates S18: X , hence, Y , so all arguments are of the same type? But if arguments instantiate multiple  schemes  and  all  arguments  also  instantiate  one  particular scheme, once again the taxonomy of T1 and T2 will not be very helpful.

8 Hitchcock worries about 'top-down' methods of generation that 'risk a combinatorial explosion of unrealized abstract possibilities' (2017, p. 236). But given an infinite number of potential actual arguments each of which can be schematized in multiple ways, we will have an infinitude of schemes generated bottom up as well.

Perhaps the solution is to resort not to argument schemes, but to types of  argument  schemes.  For  example,  Walton,  Reed  and Macagno give 12 versions of an argument from popular opinion scheme (2008, pp. 311-313). Given T1 and T2, there will be many, many  more  schemes  that  count  as  examples  of  argument  from popular opinion. Regardless, perhaps all the schemes of T1 and T2 could  be  categorized  into  a  manageable  group  of  scheme types , such that all the argument from popular opinion schemes were in one  category  and  all  the  argument  from  expert  opinion  schemes were in another and all the disjunctive syllogisms 9 in another, and so on.

This of course introduces the problem of how to type argument schemes,  which  I  am  not  sure  is  any  easier  than  the  problem  of typing  arguments  that  the  appeal  to  schemes  was  supposed  to solve. But even if we suppose the problem is solvable, there is no guarantee that the typing of schemes is a consequence of schemes themselves. Indeed, much of the recent work attempting to classify arguments is in fact independent of the traditionally listed schemes such  as  argument  from  expert  opinion,  argument  from  sign,  etc. The principles appealed to include such things as type of warrant involved (Blair 2000; Katsav and Reed 2004), semantic possibilities (Kienpointner 2018), purpose of argument/means of achieving purpose  (Macagno  2015,  2018),  type  of  proposition,  i.e.,  value, policy, or fact (Wagemans 2018), etc. But these principles undergirding  various  attempts  to  classify  arguments  are  not  gleaned from  schemes.  These  principles  could  be,  and  often  are,  applied directly  to  arguments  to  classify  them  into  types.  Many  of  these taxonomy  projects  could  proceed  without  needing  to  talk  about logical forms or arguments from pity or expertise at all. The result is a taxonomy of arguments for which the traditional schemes are, at  best,  instances  of  the  categories  generated  by  the  principles rather  than  aids  in  developing  the  taxonomy.  Indeed,  often  the resulting challenge, met with limited success, is to take the traditional  categories  such  as  'argument  from  pity'  or  'argument  by appeal to expert opinion' or 'hypothetical syllogism' or whatever

9 All the disjunctive syllogisms? (1) A v B , ~ A , so B ; (2) A v B , ~ B , so A ; (3) A v B v C , ~ B , ~ C , so A , etc.

and make them fit into the categories that these various principles independently generate.

Perhaps a principle more closely tied with schemes could serve as the basis for the taxonomy. Hitchcock, for example, hints that 'it  makes  sense  to  group  all  appeals  to  eye-witness  testimony  as belonging to a single scheme, since the same set of critical questions  apply  to  all  such  appeals.  The  same  is  true  of  appeals  to expert opinion' (2017, p. 297). Here Hitchcock is discussing using the  sameness  of  critical  questions  to  make  different  argument instances all fall under one scheme, but one might apply a similar method to make a variety of schemes all fall under one type. In other  words,  while,  according  to  T1  or  T2  there  will  be  many 'appeal  to  expert  opinion'  argument  schemes,  they  will  all  be appeals  to  expert  opinion  because  they  all  share  the  same  set  of critical questions and that set will not be shared by other types of schemes.

For this suggestion to work as a viable taxonomy, types of argument schemes would have to correspond with particular sets of critical  questions.  But  no  such  correspondence  is  forthcoming. Firstly, recall that logical forms are a type of scheme. Disjunctive syllogisms are distinct from hypothetical syllogism which are both distinct  from  affirming  the  consequent,  and  yet  typically  logical forms do not have distinct sets of critical questions associated with them, other than the generic are the premises adequate and is the connection  between  premises  and  conclusion  adequate.  Hence, some other principle, beyond appeal to critical questions would be needed to deal with all the possible logical forms. Secondly, consider the following schemes:

S26: If X is an authority about Y , and says Z within the domain of Y , then Z is most likely to be true. X is an authority about Y and says Z within the domain of Y . Hence, Z is most likely to be true.

S27: X is an authority about Y and says Z within the domain of Y . X is an authority in domain Y because X has property A , B , and C . W also has properties A , B , and C , but W says ~ Z . Hence, we should withhold judgement about Z .

S26  appears  to  be  both  an  argument  by  authority  and  a  modus ponens. S27 appears to be an argument by authority and an argument by analogy and a balance of considerations. But since there are also arguments that are modus ponens that are not arguments by  authority  as  well  as  arguments  by  analogy  that  are  neither balance  of  considerations  nor  arguments  by  authority,  no  set  of critical questions is going to both demarcate S26 and S27 as arguments from authority while also distinguishing them from modus ponens or argument by analogy, etc. 10  Finally, actual attempts at computer  modelling  of  schemes  usually  involves  making  the schemes fit a defeasible modus ponens form. (Walton, Reed, and Macagno, p. 364.) But if defeasible modus ponens is its own kind of scheme and all other schemes can be reduced to it, then no set of critical questions will both distinguish defeasible modus ponens from  other  types  and  yet  allow  all  other  types  of  schemes  to  be reducible to defeasible modus ponens.

I suspect that these worries generalize to almost any attempt to provide a neat and manageable taxonomy of arguments, let alone argument schemes-there are just too many ways of arguing that overlap with each other to get a complete and workable taxonomy. For example, if one attempts to ameliorate the overlap problem by appeal to some sort of hierarchy of schemes, one would still need to  account  for  all  the  possible  ways  of  schematizing  A1-Harry hates  Billy.  Hence,  not  possible  that  Harry  impartially  evaluates Billy's work- that actually provides and answer to the questionwhat type of argument is A1? All the single variable schematizations provided, S2-S17, certainly do not appear to neatly fall under one more general type. After all, S17X Ys Z .  Hence ,  A  B ( X C Ds  Z 's E )  and  S18X .  Hence, Y are  both  presumably  top  node schematizations  of  A1  and  yet  are  also,  presumably,  not  of  the same type. But then there is no neat hierarchical tree of schematizations that would allow us to type A1, but rather than overlapping

10 Walton,  Reed,  and  Macagno  note  this  problem  with  existent  categorization methods,  including  their  own.    For  example,  the  write:  'The  slippery  slope argument is  often  such  a  complex  argument,  combining  many  other  subarguments  of  different  types,  that  it  is  impossible  to  classify  it  under  any  single heading' (p. 351).

web of schematizations that would not allow a coherent or useful typing of A1.

Given T1 and T2, there are too many schemes with too much overlap for a manageable taxonomy of schemes to be forthcoming. I conclude this section with Hitchcock's own recent re-evaluation of work on schemes (including his own):

Argument  and  reasoning  are  too  varied  for  such  neat  pigeonholing. Indeed, in using any taxonomy of schemes as a device for analyzing and evaluating arguments, one is at serious risk of distorting the discourse or text to fit into one's taxonomy (2017, p. 297). 11

## 3.2. Argument evaluation

Schemes  aid  evaluation  of  arguments  via  the  set  of  associated critical questions. T1 and T2 do not have critical questions as part of the scheme, so the schemes themselves will not be of any help in  this  regard.  Of  course,  neither  theory  prohibits  schemes  from having associated questions  that  may  aid  in  the  evaluation  of instances of the scheme-the critical questions, however, remain separate from the identity of the scheme.

In  section  2.3  above,  I  examined  one  attempt  to  incorporate critical questions into the identity of the scheme by incorporating the  content  of  the  questions  as  additional  premises.  That  attempt generates either regress or arbitrary exclusion, but there is another way  to  make  critical  questions  a  part  of  the  scheme  that  avoids these problems. Consider, for example:

- T3: An argument scheme is a set of (i) a set of proposition expressions or propositional functions, (ii) another proposition  expression  or  propositional  function,  with  at  least  one element of (i) or (ii) being a propositional function, and (iii) a set of critical questions.

T3 doesn't try to make the elements of (iii) into elements of (i) and so avoids regress.

11  See also Dove and Nussbaum, 2018, p. 262

I am not denying that one could adopt T3 and so, by definition, make  schemes  relevant  to  argument  evaluation.  The  question remains, however, whether we ought to adopt T3 over either T1 or T2. I suggest 'no.' Firstly, if anything that satisfies T3 counts as a scheme, then T3 radically increases the combinatorial options for different schemes, and so only exacerbates the problem of schemes  satisfying  the  other  desiderata  of  a  theory  of  schemes. Secondly, theorists generally prefer to keep criteria of identity and criteria  of  evaluation  separate,  so  why,  in  this  instance,  make criteria  of  evaluation  part  of  the  definition  of  what  a  scheme  is? Thirdly, the nature and utility of critical questions are themselves a source  of  controversy  in  the  literature,  so  why  incorporate  this extra controversy into the very definition of a scheme? For example, one criticism of the appeal to critical questions is that they add nothing over and above our standard criteria for evaluating arguments.  For  example,  as  Hitchcock  (2017,  p.  297)  points  out,  it looks  like  we  can  reformulate  all  critical  questions  into  single questions concerning premise adequacy, background assumptions, and exceptions, i.e., questions that apply to all arguments. But if the critical questions are just versions of questions that apply to all arguments, then including them as part of the identity conditions of schemes is pointless. Indeed, if (1) is true and logical forms are argument  schemes,  then  the  relevant  critical  questions  appear  to just  be  the  generic,  'are  the  instances  of  the  premises  true?'  and 'is the argument form valid?', which we do not typically include as part of the identity conditions of those forms.

David Godden and Douglas Walton (2007) concede that critical questions are grounded in general standards of argument adequacy (they  focus  on  the  typical  R.S.A.  standard),  but  go  on  to  justify their use by claiming 'there may be typical, or common ways in which the R.S.A. cogency conditions could apply to arguments of a  given  schematic  type  that  would  not  typically  apply  to  other common types  of  argument'  (p.  279).  In  other  words,  a  critical question might focus the evaluator's attention on the more typical ways a particular premise such as ' A is  an  expert  in  domain D ' might fail  to  be  acceptable  or  sufficient,  whereas  the  generic  'is the premise acceptable' does not. Granted. But such a response at best  justifies  that  we  might  find  it  useful  to  appeal  to  associated

critical  questions (for at least some schemes) rather than just generic  argument  adequacy  conditions.  It  does  not  justify  that  we ought  to  make  critical  questions  part  of  the  identity  of  schemes themselves.  An  advocate  of  T1  or  T2  who  accepts  that  at  least some schemes have associated critical questions, can just as easily appeal to Godden and Walton's (see also Blair, 1999, p. 56) argument to justify why it is useful for some of the schemes to have associated questions as an advocate of T3 can.

If critical questions are to be essential to scheme identity, then at least some of the critical questions must be something other than specific  forms  of  generic  adequacy  conditions.  But  I  see  no  evidence  that  any  of  the  critical  questions  are  anything  other  than specific forms of generic argument adequacy conditions. Hence, I see  no  reason  to  make  critical  questions  part  of  the  identity  of particular schemes as in T3. Critical questions may be relevant to the evaluation of at least some arguments, but schemes by themselves, given T1 or T2, are not.

## 3.3. Enthymeme reconstruction

If  we  had  a  set  of  schemes  against  which  to  compare  argument texts, then we could recognize incomplete argument texts and use the schemes to fill in the missing pieces. For example, in response to an objection by Robert Pinto (2003) that schemes will not help with argument reconstruction since we will have to presuppose the missing  elements  to  identify  the  partial  argument  text  as  an  instance of a scheme rather than use the scheme to identify the missing elements, Godden and Walton write:

The role of a scheme at this stage of analysis is not to supply missing material to an argument, but to serve as a model for comparison. It is by comparing the argumentative material presented in a case with the known schemes that an argument can be classified as an instance of a certain scheme (2007, p. 272).

And  presumably,  once  one  has  successfully  typed  the  argument via a given scheme, one is in a position to add the relevant missing material.

Ignore  for  the  moment  skepticism  (see  Hitchcock  1998  or Goddu 2016) concerning enthymemes and ignore for the moment that  Walton,  Reed,  and  Macagno  (2008.  pp.  207-210)  even  note some  other  possibilities  for  dealing  with  enthymemes  such  as Peircean abduction or appeals to background/common knowledge. Even if we suppose that there are cases in which we want to reconstruct  arguments  from  texts  such  that  some  components  of  the final argument are not explicitly expressed in the text, schemes, at least  as  conceived here, will not play any relevant role in typing the  argument  and  subsequently  determining  the  missing  material to add. Why? Because for any given, allegedly incomplete, argument text, there will be countless distinct schemes for comparison that match the given material (including some that exactly match the given material except for the presence of at least one variable) and  yet  have  quite  diverse  additional  material  as  part  of  the scheme.  Hence,  the  mere  fact  that  the  presented  argumentative material  matches  a  particular  scheme  is  not  enough  to  say  the argument is of that scheme type, since there will be myriad other distinct schemes that match the presented argumentative material as well.

Even  if,  contra  Pinto,  one  thought  appeal  to  schemes  could somehow directly indicate the missing material to add, T1 and T2 will not do this job either. For any proposed extra premises, there is  a  scheme  that  contains  the  original  text  (perhaps  with  some elements made into variables) and expressions of the added premises  (again  with  some  elements  perhaps  made  into  variables.) Hence, the existence of a given scheme is not determining which premise should be added, since so many schemes exist, that there are schemes for any possible added set of extra premises. Even if we  restrict  ourselves  to  'plausible'  candidate  schemes  such  as adding some sort of conditional, or a generalization of some sort, or a definition, or some sort of typical nature claim or … there will be a scheme for each of the plausible candidates. Assume for the moment that, at least in some cases, some of the plausible candidates  are  wrong,  while  at  least  one  is  correct.  But  whatever  it  is that is making the one particular candidate correct in that situation it  is  not  the  fact  that  there  is  a  scheme  according  to  which  that candidate fits with the explicitly given text, since that is true for all

the plausible candidates. Hence, given T1 or T2, something other than  the  appeal  to  a  scheme  is  what  should  guide  determining argument type or determining which missing components to add.

## 3.4. Argument generation

There is a trivial sense in which schemes aid in the generation of arguments. Take any instance of a scheme according to T1 or T2. Substitute in allowable terms for the variables, and voila, an argument.  If  this  is  all  that  is  meant  by  schemes  aiding  in  argument generation or invention, then T1 and T2 do satisfy this desideratum. But I suspect argumentation scheme theorists have something more robust in mind. For example, Macagno writes: 'Considering the  type  of  conclusion  and  the  available  evidence,  the  user  can select the most appropriate scheme and make explicit the premises providing more support to his claim' (2018, p. 560).

On  its  face,  this  just  seems  like  a  version  of  the  enthymeme reconstruction problem, except the argument author (as opposed to the interpreter) has only bits and pieces-a conclusion and available  evidence  and  wants  to  know  what  else  needs  to  be  included (presumably  to  increase  the  likelihood  of  having  a  successful argument). But again, appeal to schemes will not help here (even if we exclude schemes that we know in advance are unlikely to meet the  sufficient  support  standard)  since  there  will  be  too  many schemes available to choose from. In addition, being able to appeal to the type of conclusion or available evidence to pick out an appropriate  scheme  presupposes  that  schemes  correlate  with  the type of conclusion or available evidence and that is not true of all schemes. It is certainly not true of logical forms-which are independent of content (except for the 'logical connectives'). Finally, being able to determine the scheme based on the type of conclusion  or  available  evidence,  presupposes  we  have  a  manageable argument or argument scheme taxonomy, both of which we have already seen are problematic, given T1 or T2.

## 3.5. Describing sub-group's reasoning patterns

Plenty  of  schemes  will  do  this  for  any  given  sub-group  and  its reasoning.  Indeed,  too  many  will  do  this  to  make  the  schemes theoretically  useful.  Since  any  arguing  will  instantiate  multiple schemes, we can describe the very same reasoning in many ways, and  so  if  there  is  something  useful  to  be  said  about  the  arguing instantiating  one  of  the  myriad  schemes  rather  than  others,  the schemes themselves will not be the determining factor.

This  isn't  to  say  that  there  is  nothing  useful,  in  certain  disciplines, from recognizing that certain groups use a fairly common pattern of reasoning and giving a name to that pattern and using that name to aid in communication to other scholars. Adhering to T1  or  T2  in  no  way  prohibits  theorists  from  doing  this  sort  of thing. 12

## 3.6. A radical consequence

The general reason T1 and T2 fail to satisfy many of these desiderata, at least simultaneously, is that there are too many schemes and  single  arguments  satisfy  too  many  of  the  schemes  (indeed recall  all  single  conclusion  argument  satisfy  S19,  X,  so  Y)  for schemes to be what is doing the desired work. Assuming there are no other unrecognized benefits accruing from T1 or T2, then T1 and T2, as a theory of the nature of argument schemes would have something like the following as a consequence:

GT1: Argument schemes are not a theoretically  significant part of a general theory of arguments and argumentation.

Just as the number of premises an argument has is a piece of data we can provide about an argument, so too are the possible schematizations of that argument. But just as the number of premises of an argument is theoretically irrelevant, so to, according to GT1, is the set of schemes that a given argument instantiates.

12 For example, Jean Goodwin has told me in conversation that this sort of thing is quite common in rhetoric/communication studies, but also that there is much less concern about constructing a theory of such patterns that is complete and manageable.

GT1 is very simple-argumentation schemes are theoretically irrelevant. Given the amount of work that has been done on argumentation  schemes  I  expect  this  consequence  to  be  extremely unpalatable.  I  turn  next,  then,  to  considering  ways  to  avoid  this radical consequence.

## 4. A reductio ?

Given that T1 and T2 fail to satisfy the standard desiderata of a theory  of  argument  schemes,  and  as  a  likely  consequence,  argument schemes have no significant theoretical role to play in argumentation theory, one might take this as a reductio of T1 and T2. If  they  do  not  satisfy  the  primary  roles  desired  of  argument schemes, then they are not adequate theories of the nature of argumentation  schemes  despite  their  simplicity.  This,  of  course leaves the challenge of determining what argumentations schemes are and none of the existing takes on argument schemes are particularly good at justifying that they in fact satisfy these roles either. At best, they offer promissory notes that we can achieve a notion of schemes that provides a complete, manageable list of schemes that  will  satisfy  at  least  a  significant  proportion  of  the  desired outcomes. I remain skeptical that we will be able to simultaneously  get  'complete'  and  'manageable',  let  alone  also  satisfying  the desired  outcomes.  While  a  full  defense  of  my  skepticism  would require another full paper, I turn now to two strategies one might adopt to try to avoid the negative consequences adduced so far.

## 4.1. Restricting the class of schemes?

One straightforward solution is to limit what counts as a scheme. For  example,  as  we  saw  in  the  beginning,  Walton,  Reed,  and Macagno talk  about  schemes  as  'structures  of  common  types  of arguments'. Walton and Godden define schemes as: 'stereotypical patterns  of  defeasible  reasoning  that  typically  occur  in  common, everyday  arguments'  (Walton  and  Godden,  2007,  p.  267).  So perhaps schemes are not schematic versions of any possible argument, but merely the forms of 'common' or 'stereotypical' types of arguments used in everyday discourse. Hence, (1) is false, since only the logical forms that are commonly instantiated are schemes,

along with the typical fallacies and other common argument structures  such  as  argument  from  authority,  expert  opinion,  etc.  Presumably,  the  hope  would  be  that  this  restricted  class  of  entities would be much more manageable than the class set out by either T1 or T2.

Firstly, even if this class of entities, once concretely articulated, was much more manageable, I doubt that it is theoretically interesting. For example, a scheme such as:

## S28: God commands that we do x , so we ought to do x ,

may have had many more instances than it has now. But the mere fact  that  what  was  once  a  common  way  of  arguing  is  now  no longer  a  common  way,  or  at  least  a  significantly  less  common way,  of  arguing,  or  vice  versa,  should  have  no  bearing  on  what arguments or argument schemes are as theoretical concepts we use to  explain  the  phenomenon  of  argumentation  through  time.  Hydrogen  and  helium  make  up  98%  of  the  universe.  Oxygen  and nitrogen  make up 99% of the earth's atmosphere. Hydrogen and oxygen make up 96.5% of earth's oceans. Oxygen, silicon, aluminum, iron, calcium, sodium, potassium, and magnesium make up 98% of the earth's crust. Yet despite the fact that these elements are  the  most  common  elements,  we  certainly  do  not  restrict  our theory of the building blocks of the universe to just these elements, rather  our  theory  extends  to all the  naturally  occurring  elements, the  human  created  elements,  and  even  the  possible  elements  beyond those. Similarly, our theory of arguments and their structures and  forms  should  not  be  limited  to  the  common  or  stereotypical cases.  After  all,  as  theorists,  we  are  interested  in  not  merely  explaining  what  commonly  happens,  but  what  does  happen,  what could have happened but didn't, what is unlikely to ever happen and why, and so on.

This is not to say that we should not focus the majority of our research  attention  on  understanding  the  most  common  ways  of arguing, any more than we should limit studying the properties and interactions  of  hydrogen,  oxygen,  and  nitrogen.  What  I  am  suggesting is problematic is trying to make a theoretical category out of  what  is  most  common  or  stereotypical-our  theories  need  to

explain not merely what is common or stereotypical, but what is uncommon  and  why  and  what  is  merely  possible  and  why  and perhaps even what is impossible.

Secondly, even if we force our theory to have a category that is 'the forms of common or stereotypical arguments' I still doubt the result will be manageable and theoretically useful simultaneously. On the one hand, I suspect there will still be an infinite number, or at least an unmanageable number, of potential schemes, especially if one considers the schemes common to a particular discipline or context.  For  example,  consider  the  combinatorial  explosion  of such  elements  of  reasoning  as:  ' x struck y ,'  ' x slapped y ,'  ' x punched y ,' ' x spit at y ,' ' x bit y ,' ' x kicked y ,' ' x threw x 's shoe at y ,' etc., so ' x ought to be punished,' ' x ought to be sanctioned,' ' x ought to be chastised,' ' x ought to be shown a red card,' ' x ought to be shown a yellow card,' ' x has committed a foul,' etc., or even the more general, ' x is  an  expert in y '  and ' x says z ,'  ' x wonders whether z ,' ' x hypothesizes z ,' ' x suggests z ' etc., so 'we ought to believe z ,' 'we ought to suspect z ,' we ought to hypothesize z ,' etc. Add in all the common patterns of reasoning from specific scientific  disciplines, specific games based on their specific rules, and all  the  variations  on  more  general  schemes  like  arguing  from authority, pity, etc., and we will still have an unmanageable number of schemes.

We could try to solve this problem by not just restricting ourselves to common reasoning patterns, but general forms of  these common reasoning patterns.  For  example,  one  might  try  to  subsume all the specific cases of the first example given above under the more general scheme:

S29: X made contact of type Y with Z . Contact of type Z in context C deserves a response of type R . X and Z are in context C , so X ought to receive response R .

While  I  suspect  a  full  review  of  treating  argument  schemes  as general  forms  of  common  reasoning  patterns  would  require  a separate paper in itself, I can here at least suggest some challenges facing such a proposal.

Firstly,  to  actually  solve  the  'manageability'  problem,  one would have to deny that all the common reasoning patterns themselves are schemes. The only things that are schemes are the general forms. But now the theorist has the added challenge of providing a principled distinction between a mere reasoning pattern, and the  general  form  of  one.  This  challenge  is  especially  pressing, given  that  modus  ponens,  say,  is  supposed  to  be  itself  a  scheme and yet also looks itself to be a common reasoning pattern.

Secondly, to even have a chance of making the set of schemes manageable, these general schemes are going to have to be pretty general-but then the general forms are going to be quite divorced from actual commonplace cases of reasoning. For example, actual cases of reasoning are not themselves usually instances of S29. I justify the giving of a red card in the context of a soccer match by saying  that  Blue  29  punched  Red  12.  I  do  not  say  that  Blue  29 made  contact  of  type  'punch'  with  Red  12  and  contact  of  type 'punch'  in  the  context  of  a  soccer  match  deserves  a  response  of type  'red  card'  and  Blue  29  and  Red  12  are  in  the  context  of  a soccer  match,  so  Blue  29  ought  to  receive  a  red  card.  So,  given that the actual instances of arguing rarely satisfy the explicit form of the generalized scheme, to actually tell what type of argument is in play one would not only need to be able to schematize the argument, but then generalize the resulting pattern as well in order to get  at  the  actual  scheme  being  instantiated.  But,  as  we  have  already seen, there are many ways to schematize a given argument, so it is still possible that a given argument will instantiate numerous different general forms.

Thirdly,  how general can the general form get? 13  Every argument has the general form ' X , so Y ,' but that form is not theoretically useful as a scheme. I suspect that to be useful, schemes have to  have  at  least  one  'argumentative  constant'  other  than  the  illative, such as in:

S30: ' X is an expert in Z , so Y .'

13  See also Blair 2001 and Walton and Godden 2007 for more discussion of the generality issue.

But I suspect the number of general forms with at least one 'argumentative constant' other than the illative is still extremely large (more on this in the next section). And if we need more than one 'argumentative constant,' then how many do we need and why?

Fourthly,  do  the  general  forms  need  to  build  in  context  as  I have done in S29 or not as in S30? On the one hand, building in context makes the argument scheme appear more plausible since one can see the connection between X 's action say and X receiving response R , whereas in the case of S30, there is no common variable between the premise and the conclusion, which suggests there are going to be many extremely bad instances of S30. But on the other hand, theorists (a) want to be able to apply schemes across contexts  and  (b)  want  to  be  able  to  separate  the  argument  being made from the context in which it is being made, and both of these items  are  more  challenging,  if  not  impossible,  if  context  is  built into  the  scheme.  Note  also  that  arguers  usually  do  not  explicitly appeal  to  the  context  in  which  they  are  arguing  as  part  of  their argument, so once again these general forms appealing to context would be divorced from most actual instances of reasoning.

Again, I do not take these suggestions to prove that no way of limiting the class of argument schemes allowed by T1 or T2 will work. But the challenges of providing such a theoretically significant and manageable set of argumentation schemes are daunting to say the least.

## 4.2. Reject (1)?

At  several  junctures  above,  we  saw  that  holding  (1)-logical forms  are  a  type  of  argument  scheme-was  generating  various problems for the argumentation scheme theorist, such as an explosion of the number of schemes and schemes with entire propositions  as  variables.  So  a  straightforward  solution  might  be  to  just reject (1). Indeed, in presentations of earlier versions of this work, the  most  common  audience  response  was  to  propose  giving  up (1). 14 The  option  considered  above  to  try  to  restrict  schemes  to

14 For example, at the Ninth Conference of the International Society for the Study of Argumentation, 2018.

'common or stereotypical ways of arguing' is itself an instance of rejecting (1).

The primary purpose of this paper is to explore the consequences of a theory of the nature of schemes that does respect (1). If the consequences  are  unpalatable  enough,  one  can  certainly  try  to generate a theory that rejects (1)-but what such a theory would look like is not the primary concern of this paper. For those who wish  to  keep  the  desiderata  of  a  theory  of  schemes  outlined  in section  3  and  yet  reject  (1),  I  leave  it  as  a  challenge  to  actually produce such a theory.

To see the scope of this challenge I finish this section with the following observation about a theory of the nature of schemes that rejects (1).

Consider:

S31: All X are Y and some X are Z , so some Z are Y .

and

S32: X said Y in domain Z and X is an expert in domain Z , so it is highly likely that Y .

The challenge is to come up with a principled reason to reject S31 as a scheme, but keep S32, while at the same time respecting the desiderata  of  section  3.  I  admit  that  I  am  hard  pressed  to  even imagine  what  a  principled  reason  for  keeping  S32,  but  rejecting S31  is  going  to  look  like,  let  alone  one  that  will also keep  the desired outcomes of a theory of schemes. I strongly suspect that several  of  the  arguments  given  in  section  4.1,  such  as  the  likelihood of there still being an infinite number of schemes even without (1), will carry over to any attempt to reject (1). And if there are still an infinite number of schemes (or scheme types) even without holding  (1),  then  many  of  the  desired  outcomes  of  a  theory  of schemes remain unachievable.

But perhaps one is willing to give up not just (1), but also the desire  for  a  general  and  complete  theory  of  schemes.  In  other words, to give up the quest for any GT with respect to argumenta-

tion  schemes.  As  one  commentator  on  an  earlier  version  of  this work put it: 'schemes are not an exhaustive classificatory system of arguments into their natural kinds. Rather they supply a somewhat arbitrary, ad-hoc typification of arguments into recognizable commonplaces or Aristotelean Topoi.' 15

I have absolutely no quarrel with such a position since I strongly  suspect  that  at  best  schemes,  as  commonly  understood  in  the literature,  are  ad-hoc  groupings  of  commonplace  or  stereotypical reasoning  patterns  (including  some,  but  not  all,  logical  forms). However, if one takes this route, then one should give up on trying to generate a complete and exhaustive taxonomy of all arguments, providing a mechanism for filling in any enthymeme or generating any argument whatsoever, or evaluating any sub-groups arguments on the basis of schemes. In other words, one would have to give up on using the schemes to achieve the desiderata outlined in section 3.

Note that I am not at all saying that there is no practical benefit from  availing  ourselves  of  such  ad-hoc  groupings.  For  example, individuals  may  be  able  to  reason  better  or  more  efficiently  or faster  with  at  least  a  rudimentary  grasp  of  some  of  these  ad-hoc groupings or perhaps some could use the groupings as models in argument  generation  and  so  increase  the  chances  of  making  a cogent argument. Navigating via the north star has practical benefits; using the rule of 72 to calculate doubling time 16 has practical benefits, but the north star is not a fundamental entity in a theory of navigation or spatial position and the rule of 72 is not a fundamental part of theory of interest rates or number theory. Similarly, argument schemes on such a view would have no place in a fundamental theory of arguments. We should just not try to take the ad-hoc rough and ready groupings that may help us, say, identify a likely  flaw  in  a  particular  bit  of  reasoning  in  some  contexts,  and try  to  generalize  those  groupings  into  a  theory  applicable  to  all arguments and argumentation.

15  Unknown reviewer.

16  For example, at 10% annual return, we would expect our money to double in roughly 72/10 or 7.2 years.

What  then  of  a  theory  of  schemes?  I  turn  now  to  a  modest proposal  that  may  mitigate  some  of  the  negative  and  skeptical results achieved so far.

## 5. A slight refocusing?

T1 and T2 are both simple, elegant theories of the nature of argumentation  schemes.  Just  as  there  are  lots  and  lots  of  arguments there are lots and lots of schemes these arguments can instantiate. Unfortunately, the sheer number of schemes makes them unwieldy for achieving the theoretical benefits many have hoped to gain by appealing to schemes. Given that I currently see no plausible way of  defining  schemes  to  actually  achieve  the  desired  theoretical benefits,  I  choose  simplicity  and  elegance.  But  I  also  suspect  a slight  refocusing  might  make  us  less  worried  about  failing  to achieve the theoretical desiderata.

What are we getting when we schematize (and generalize) reasoning? Presumably we are trying to understand the 'argumentative  force'  of  whatever  is  being  left  as  the  'argumentative  constant' in the scheme (and how various things left as constants will interact  with  each  other).  A  simple  example-leaving  'or'  and 'not' as constants in ' P or Q ',  'not P ',  will,  given  true  premises, entail ' Q '. In other words, we gain information about how 'or' and 'not' argumentatively interact. Similarly, leaving 'is an expert in' and  'testifies  that'  as  constants  in  ' X is  an  expert  in Y '  and  ' X testifies  that Z '  we  can  wonder  what  conditions  need  to  hold  in order for something plausible to be inferable from instances of ' X is  an  expert  in Y '  and  ' X testifies  that Z '  working  together.  Of course, if we change either one of the 'constants,' we can change the  results.  For  example,  consider  replacing  'testifies  that'  with 'asserts  that,'  or  'wonders  whether,'  or  'supposes  that,'  or  'hypothesizes that,' or 'suggests that,' etc.

So, the proposal then is to focus our attention on propositional functions 17  rather than argument schemes. Instead of focusing our attention on trying to identify arguments from expert opinion say,

17 Perhaps these propositional functions are the atoms that Hoppman (2018) is looking for, though as it stands there are going to be too many of these 'constants' for the sort of taxonomy Hoppman desires.

we should focus on identifying appeals to expertise, i.e., instances of  the  propositional  function,  ' X is  an  expert  in Z .'  Of  course, given  that,  as  argumentation  theorists,  we  are  presumably  ultimately  interested  in  distinguishing  good  arguments  from  bad arguments, we are likely to be very interested in determining the argumentative force of such a propositional function both across various  contexts  and  in  relation  to  other  propositional  functions such as ' X says Y ' or ' X doubts that Y ,' etc. Some combinations of propositional functions in certain contexts may be more likely to have  good  argumentative  results,  and  so,  unsurprisingly,  we  can expect more instances of those combinations to appear rather than the combinations less likely to achieve argumentative success. But to  understand  the  'argumentative  force'  of  'is  an  expert  in'  we need to understand not only the combinations of functions (at least one of which contains the 'logical' constant 'is an expert in') that do appear frequently, but understand why other combinations do not, and perhaps understand which combinations ought to appear more (or less) frequently given our desire not merely for argumentative success, but rationally persuasive arguments.

One could define classes of arguments in terms of these propositional functions. For example, an argument from expert opinion could be the class of arguments involving ' X is an expert in Z ' (or perhaps involving it essentially). Similarly, conditional arguments would be arguments involving (or involving essentially) the propositional function 'If X ,  then Y .'  But I doubt the resulting classes would  be  very  theoretically  interesting.  On  the  one  hand,  there would  be  plenty  of  overlap  between  classes-any  argument  involving ' X is an expert in Z ' will be transformable into a defeasible  modus  ponens  form,  so  such  transformed  arguments  will  be both  conditional  arguments  and  expert  opinion  arguments.  Also, such classes are likely to be extremely heterogenous groupings of arguments. For example, some conditional arguments will be good and some will be bad and some will be valid, i.e. those also involving ' X ' getting us to ' Y ' or 'not Y ' getting us to 'not X ,'  and some  will  not  be  generally  valid,  i.e.  those  also  involving  ' Y ' getting us to ' X ,' or 'not X ' getting us to 'not Y ,' or ' Z ' getting us to  whatever.  Some  will  be  indicative  conditionals,  some  will  be subjunctive conditionals, some will be counterfactuals, and so on.

Hence, the class of conditional arguments will be too heterogenous to be theoretically significant.

Of  course,  some  combinations  of  various  propositional  functions may appear enough in our argumentation that they get special names, such as modus ponens or argument from sign, etc. But to  understand  why  those  combinations  may  appear  more  than others we probably have to understand the argumentative force of the component propositional functions and how they interact with not just the other propositional functions in the combination under examination, but how they interact with other propositional functions  that  could  have  been  used  but  were  not.  The  mistake  is  to think  that  just  because  there  are  more  prevalent  combinations  of propositional functions, there must be a theoretically useful underlying structure of types of arguments. Rather we should expect our desire to demarcate good from bad arguments in various contexts to  itself  generate  clusters  of  combinations  of  functions  that  are more  likely  to  be  used  (because  they  are  good  or  successful  or because they are easily confused with clusters that are good). But just as formal logic is interested in demarcating the good and bad interactions of such connectives as 'or,' 'not,' and 'if, then,' so too should we expect more general argumentation studies to be interested in demarcating the good and bad interactions of 'expertise,' and  'saying,'  and  perhaps  a  strong  emotion  such  as  'hatred'  in making inferences about what is said more or less reasonable. The advantage formal logic has is that, classically at least, the connectives  are  inter-definable,  so  it  is  easy  to  generate  a  finite  set  of valid  forms  that  can  be  used  to  determine  validity/invalidity  for any target argument (at least relative to the chosen formal structure). The typical 'constants' of most defeasible schemes, however, are not inter-definable, and so, given the sheer number, a function of the combinatorial power of our languages, of such potential constants,  we  should  not  be  surprised  that  we  cannot  generate  a manageable set of defeasible forms from such functions, if at all.

To  sum  up:  Specific  focus  on  particular  schemes,  is  perhaps better construed as attempts to understand the argumentative/inferential  force  of  very  particular  'argumentative  constants' such as 'is an expert in' or 'has very strong emotion… towards…' or  'if  …,  then  …'  etc.,  through  in-depth  analyses  of  how  those

functions  interact  with  other  functions  and  the  preconditions  or scope of application of those functions for generating acceptable inferences.  Refocusing  on  particular  propositional  functions  will not  generate  any  of  the  outcomes  desired  of  schemes,  such  as providing a taxonomy of arguments or helping with the so-called problem of enthymemes, 18  since the sheer number of possibilities involved  in  argumentation  and  the  expressive  power  of  our  language likely precludes ever achieving such outcomes. At the same time, facility with (i) recognizing crucial functions, (ii) the interactions amongst propositional functions, (iii) the conditions needed for acceptable instances of functions in various contexts 19 and (iv) the  resulting  inferential  strengths  and  weaknesses,  without  trying to  force  every  argument  to  fit  into  a  theoretically  dubious  set  of argument schemes, can be useful in the evaluation of arguments and  the  invention  of  one's  own  (hopefully  stronger)  arguments. More  generally,  focusing  on  propositional  functions  rather  than schemes makes one more open to alternative combinations of such functions  rather  than  trying  to  subsume  every  argument  into  a fixed set of schemes.

## 6. Conclusion

Despite  significant  and  important  analyses  of  many  particular schemes, which I interpret as attempts to understand the argumentative force of such propositional functions as ' X is an expert in Z ' or ' A is  a  sign  of B '  or  'Act X has  value Y ,'  etc.,  there  has  been little  success  in  generating  an  acceptable  underlying  theory  of argumentation  schemes.  T1  or  T2  are  both  simple  and  elegant theories  of  the  nature  of  argument  schemes  that  encompass  all identified schemes in the literature and all logical forms and many more potential schemes besides.

One  consequence  of  T1's  or  T2's  power  to  capture  all  these schemes in a simple way, however, is a tremendous proliferation

18 A or B , so A -what is the missing function?  'Not B '.  You sure?  Why not 'If B , then A ' or 'If A or B , then A ,' or 'The probability of B is less than one in a trillion,' or…

19 I suspect that at least some critical questions are trying to point toward adequacy conditions for acceptable uses of particular propositional functions.

in  the  number  of  potential  schemes.  Given  the  sheer  number  of potential arguments we should not be surprised by the sheer number  of  schemes.  Unfortunately,  the  number  of  schemes  given  by T1 or T2 precludes schemes from fulfilling any of the outcomes theorists  have  hoped  to  gain  from  schemes,  such  as  providing  a manageable taxonomy of arguments, aiding in enthymeme reconstruction,  evaluating  or  generating  arguments,  or  describing  particular sub-groups' reasoning processes. Indeed, if no other potential  theoretical  benefits  from  T1  or  T2  are  forthcoming,  an  even more radical consequence is that argumentation schemes are generally theoretically irrelevant. To avoid that result, the onus is on defenders  of  argument  schemes  to  provide  an  account  of  their nature  that  could  be  part  of  a  general,  non-arbitrary,  theory  of schemes and yet still gives them a theoretically significant role to play.

Failing that, should we then abandon T1 or T2? No. We should abandon the attempt to achieve the desired outcomes, if they really are desired, via a theory of schemes. Perhaps some of those outcomes can be achieved via other means. For example, nothing I have  said  here  precludes  the  possibility  of  appealing  to  various scheme  independent  principles  to  try  to  generate  a  taxonomy  of arguments-whether any such taxonomy would be both manageable and theoretically significant remains to be seen.

What has the long standing attempt to generalize and schematize  arguments  gained  us?  A  much  better  understanding  of  the argumentative force of various 'constants' such as 'is a sign of,' 'is an expert in,' 'or,' and so on, both in various combinations and in  interaction  with  each  other.  Hence,  I  recommend  building  on these gains and refocusing on deepening our understanding of the commonly  used  functions,  and  perhaps  even  the  less  commonly used  functions,  and  their  interactions,  rather  than  attempting  a theory of the nature of argument schemes beyond T1 or T2.

## Acknowledgements:

I  thank  numerous  unknown  reviewers  of  this  paper  (and  earlier versions  of  this  paper)  along  with  audiences  at  presentations  of

shorter versions of this work, but most especially the audience at the Ninth ISSA conference in Amsterdam in 2018.

## References:

Blair,  J.  Anthony.  1999.  Presumptive  reasoning  /  argument:  An  overlooked class. Protosociology 13(1): 46-60.

- Blair,  J.  Anthony.  2000.  A  theory  of  normative  reasoning  schemes.  In Proceedings of the third OSSA conference: Argumentation at the century's turn , eds. Hans V. Hansen, Christopher W. Tindale, and Elmar Sveda. St. Catharines, ON: OSSA.

Blair, J. Anthony. 2001. Walton's argumentation schemes for presumptive  reasoning:  A  critique  and  development. Argumentation 15(4): 365-379.

Dove, Ian J., Nussbaum, E. Michael. 2018. In Argumentation and inference:  Proceedings  of  the  2nd  European  conference  on  argumentation, Fribourg, eds. S. Oswald and D. Maillat, D, (2): 261-278. London: College Publications.

- Garssen,  Bart.  2001.  Argumentation  schemes.  In Crucial  concepts  in argumentation theory, ed. Frans H. van Eemeren, 81-99. Amsterdam: University Press.

Garssen, Bart. 1994. Recognizing argumentation schemes. In Studies in Pragma-Dialectics, eds.  Frans  H.  van  Eemeren  and  Rob  Grootendorst, 105-111. Amsterdam: Sic Sat.

Goddu, G.C. 2019. A simple theory of argument schemes. Proceedings of the Ninth Conference of the International Society for the Study of Argumentation ,  Bart  J  Garssen,  et  al.,  (eds.):  421-428.  Amsterdam: Sic Sat.

Goddu, G. C. 2016. On the very concept of an enthymeme. OSSA Conference Archive 84. URL:

- &lt;http://scholar.uwindsor.ca/ossaarchive/OSSA11/papersandcomment aries/84&gt;

Hitchcock, David. 2017. On reasoning and argument .  Cham:  Springer International Publishing AG.

Hitchcock, David. 1998. Does the traditional treatment of enthymemes rest on a mistake? Argumentation 12(1): 15-37. (Reprinted in Hitchcock (2017).

Hoppman, Michael J. 2018. Towards a chemical taxonomy for types of arguments  and  inferences. Argumentation  and  inference:  Proceedings  of  the  2nd  European  conference  on  argumentation,  Fribourg,

eds.  S. Oswald  and  D.  Maillat,  D,  (1):  593-605.  London:  College Publications.

Katzav, Joel, Reed, Christopher. 2004. On argumentation schemes and the  natural  classification  of  arguments. Argumentation 18(2):  239259.

Kienpointner, Manfred. 1992. How to classify arguments. In Argumentation illuminated, eds. F. van Eemeren, R. Grootendorst, A. Blair, and C. Willard, 178-188. Amsterdam: University Press.

Kienpointner, Manfred. 2018. Thirty years after: Towards a typology of argument schemes. In Argumentation  and  inference:  Proceedings  of the  2nd  European  conference  on  argumentation,  Fribourg, eds.  S. Oswald and D. Maillat,  D,  (1):  543-558.  London:  College  Publications.

Keller,  Lorraine.  2013.  The  metaphysics  of  propositional  constituency. Canadian journal of philosophy 43(5-6): 655-678.

Lumer,  Christopher.  2011.  Argument  schemes  -  an  epistemological approach.  In Argumentation:  Cognition  &amp;  community.  Proceedings of  the  9th  OSSA  conference ,  ed.  Frank  Zenker.  CD-ROM,  1-32. Windsor, ON: OSSA.

Macagno, Fabrizio. 2015. A means-end classification of argumentation schemes. In Reflections on theoretical issues in argumentation theory, eds. F. van Eemeren and B. Garssen, 183-201. Cham: Springer.

Macagno,  Fabrizio.  2018.  Classifying  and  combining  argumentation schemes for  representing  real  arguments.  In Argumentation and inference: Proceedings of the 2nd European conference on argumentation, Fribourg, eds. S. Oswald and D. Maillat, D, (2): 559-576. London: College Publications.

Pinto, Robert C. 2003. Commentary on C. Reed and D. Walton 'Argumentation schemes in argument-as-process and argument-asproduct.' In Informal Logic at 25: Proceedings of the Windsor conference ,  Eds.  J.A.  Blair,  D.  Farr,  H.V.  Hansen, R.H.  Johnson  and C.W. Tindale , Windsor, ON: OSSA. URL: &lt;https://scholar.uwindsor.ca/ossaarchive/OSSA5/papersandcomment aries/76/&gt;

Wagemans, Jean H.M. 2018. Assertoric syllogistic and the periodic table of  arguments. In Argumentation  and  inference:  Proceedings  of  the 2nd  European  conference  on  argumentation,  Fribourg, eds.  S. Oswald and D. Maillat, D, (1): 577-591. London: College Publications.

Walton,  Douglas  N.,  C.  Reed  and  F.  Macagno.  2008. Argumentation schemes . Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.

Walton,  Douglas  N.,  Christopher  Reed.  2005.  Argumentation  schemes and enthymemes. Synthese , 145 (3): 339-370. URL: &lt;http://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-005-6198-x&gt;

Walton,  Douglas  N.  1996. Argument schemes for presumptive reasoning . Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Walton,  Douglas  N.,  Godden,  David.  2005.  The  nature  and  status  of critical questions. In The uses of argument: Proceedings of a conference at McMaster University, ed. D. Hitchcock, 476-484. Hamilton, Ontario: OSSA.

Walton, Douglas N., Godden, David. 2007. Advances in the theory of argumentation schemes and critical questions. Informal logic ,  27(3): 276-292.

Wyner, Adam. 2016. A functional perspective on argumentation schemes. Argument &amp; computation 7(2-3): 113-133.